Endangered wild salmon infected by
newly discovered viruses

Kristina M Miller,Karia H Kaukinen,Shaorong Li, 
Amy Tabata, Amy Teffer,Hugh W Ferguson.

1Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada;2Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and 
Nanaimo, Canada;3Pacific Salmon Foundation, Vancouver, Canada;
4Department of Forest Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada;
5Fisheries and Cooperative Resource Management
Institute, School of Resource and Environmental Management, Simon Fraser
University, Burnaby, Canada;6School of Veterinary Medicine, St. George’s
University, True Blue, Grenada;7Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada;8Department of Botany,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada;9Institute for the Oceans and
Fisheries, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
Abstract The collapse of iconic, keystone populations of sockeye (Oncorhynchus nerka) and
Chinook (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) salmon in the Northeast Pacific is of great concern. It is
thought that infectious disease may contribute to declines, but little is known about viruses
endemic to Pacific salmon. Metatranscriptomic sequencing and surveillance of dead and moribund
cultured Chinook salmon revealed a novel arenavirus, reovirus and nidovirus. Sequencing revealed
two different arenavirus variants which each infect wild Chinook and sockeye salmon. In situ
hybridisation localised arenavirus mostly to blood cells. Population surveys of >6000 wild juvenile
Chinook and sockeye salmon showed divergent distributions of viruses, implying different
epidemiological processes. The discovery in dead and dying farmed salmon of previously
unrecognised viruses that are also widely distributed in wild salmon, emphasizes the potential role
that viral disease may play in the population dynamics of wild fish stocks, and the threat that these
viruses may pose to aquaculture.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.47615.001
Introduction
Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) species have supported coastal ecosystems and Indigenous pop-
ulations surrounding the North Pacific Ocean for tens of millennia. Today, through their anadromous
life history, salmon continue to transport nutrients between aquatic and terrestrial environments
(Cederholm  et  al.,1999),  supply  the  primary  food  sources  for  orca  whales  and  sea  lions
(Wasser et al., 2017; Willson and Halupka, 1995; Chasco et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2017) and
provide economic livelihoods for local communities (Noakes et al., 2002). In the Northeast Pacific,
widespread declines of Chinook (O. tshawytscha) and sockeye (O. nerka) salmon have occurred in
the last 30 years, leading some populations to the brink of extirpation (Peterman and Dorner,
2012; Heard et al., 2007; Miller et al., 2011; Jeffries et al., 2014), and a cause of great concern to
Indigenous groups, commercial and recreational fishers, and the general public. Although the exact
number of salmon spawning in rivers is unknown, there are large declines in sockeye salmon over a

eLife digest Keystone species are animals and plants that play a pivotal role in supporting the
ecosystems they live in, making their conservation a high priority. Chinook and sockeye salmon are
two such species. These fish play a central role in the coastal ecosystems of the Northeast Pacific,
where they have supported Indigenous populations for thousands of years.
The last three decades have seen large declines in populations of Chinook and sockeye salmon.
One factor that may be involved in these declines is viral infection. In the last ten years, advances in
DNA sequencing technologies have led to the discovery of many new viruses, and Mordecai et al.
used these technologies to look for new viruses in Pacific salmon.
First, Mordecai et al. looked for viruses in dead and dying salmon from farms and discovered
three previously unknown viruses. Next, they screened for these viruses in farmed salmon, hatchery
salmon and wild salmon to determine their distribution. Two of the viruses were present in fish from
the three sources, while one of the viruses was only found in farmed fish. The fact that the three
viruses are distributed differently raises questions about how the viruses are transmitted within and
between farmed, hatchery and wild salmon populations.
These findings will aid salmon-conservation efforts by informing the extent to which these viruses
are present in wild salmon populations. Future work will focus on determining the risks these viruses
pose to salmon health and investigating the potential for exchange between hatchery, farmed and
wild salmon populations. While farmed Pacific salmon may pose some transmission risk to their wild
counterparts, they also offer the opportunity to study disease processes that are not readily
observable in wild salmon. In turn, such data can be used to develop policies to minimize the impact
of these infectious agents and improve the survival of wild salmon populations.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.47615.002
large geographic area (Peterman and Dorner, 2012). Similarly, Chinook salmon stocks are at only a
small percentage of their historic levels, and more than 50 stocks are extinct (Heard et al., 2007).
It is thought that infectious disease may contribute to salmon declines (Miller et al., 2011), but
little is known about infectious agents, especially viruses, endemic to Pacific salmon. Infectious dis-
ease has been identified as a potential factor in poor early marine survival in migratory salmon; an
immune response to viruses has been associated with mortality in wild migratory smolts and adults
(Miller et al., 2011; Jeffries et al., 2014), and in unspecified mortalities of salmon in marine net
pens in British Columbia (BC) (Miller et al., 2017; Di Cicco et al., 2018). For instance, immune
responses to viruses such as Infectious haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV) and potentially undis-
covered viruses, have been associated with mortality in wild juvenile salmon (Jeffries et al., 2014).
This is an important observation as mortality of juvenile salmon can be as high as ~90% transitioning
from fresh water to the marine environment (Clark et al., 2016). Together, these suggest that there
are undiscovered viruses which may contribute to decreased survival of Pacific salmon but a con-
certed effort to look for viruses that may contribute to mortality has been absent.
Here, virus-discovery was implemented to screen for viruses associated with mortality. Together,
sequencing of dead or moribund aquaculture salmon and live-sampled wild salmon, in-situ hybridiza-
tion, and epidemiological surveys revealed that previously unknown viruses, some of which are asso-
ciated with disease, infect wild salmon from different populations.
Results and discussion
Fish were screened against a viral disease detection biomarker panel (VDD) that elucidates a con-
served  transcriptional  pattern  indicative  of  an  immune  response  to  active  RNA  viral  infection
(Miller et al., 2017). For instance, in a previous study, we showed that 31% of moribund Atlantic
salmon were in a viral disease state, and half of these were not known to be positive for any known
RNA viruses (Di Cicco et al., 2018). Individuals that were strongly VDD-positive, but negative for
any known salmon viruses (e.g. Piscine orthoreovirus, Erythrocytic necrosis virus, Infectious pancre-
atic necrosis virus, Infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus, Infectious salmon anaemia virus and
Pacific  salmon  paramyxovirus)  were  subject  to  metatranscriptomic  sequencing.  The  sequencing
revealed viral transcripts belonging to members of the Arenaviridae, Nidovirales and Reoviridae.


Nucleic acid extractions
Samples were provided by the Fisheries and Oceans, Canada Aquaculture Management Division
and Salmon Enhancement Program. Additional samples were collected by the Hakai Institute Juve-
nile Salmon Program. Hatchery samples are identified by fin clipping, and in this study, wild fish
could also encompass unmarked hatchery fish. DNA is extracted for detection of DNA viruses, bac-
teria and parasites from the same tissues from which we extract RNA to target RNA viruses. Nucleic
acid extractions on the audit samples (eight tissues-gill, atrium, ventricle, liver, pyloric caeca, spleen,
head kidney and posterior kidney) were as previously described (Laurin et al., 2019). For the wild
Chinook and sockeye samples, homogenization using Tri-reagent was performed in a Mixer Mill
(Qiagen, Maryland) on each tissue independently (five tissues- gill, liver, heart, head kidney and
brain). Tri-reagent homogenates were organically separated using bromochloropropane, with the
RNA-containing aqueous layer removed for RNA extraction and the lower DNA-containing organic
layer separated from the organics using a TNES-Urea Buffer (Asahida et al., 1996).
For the DNA extractions, a pool of 250 ml (5 tissues contributing 50 ml each) from each of the tis-
sue TNES aqueous layers was processed for DNA using the BioSprint 96 DNA Blood kit (Qiagen,
Maryland) and the BioSprint 96 instrument (Qiagen, Maryland) both based on manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. DNA was quantified using spectrophotometer readings performed on the Infinite M200Pro
spectrophotometer (Tecan Group Ltd., Switzerland) and normalised to 62.5 ng/ml using the Freedom
Evo (Tecan Group Ltd., Switzerland) liquid handling unit, based on manufacturer’s instructions.
Similarly, a pool of 100 ml (5 tissues contributing 20 ul each) of the aqueous layer was processed
for RNA using the Magmax 96 for Microarrays RNA kit (Ambion Inc, Austin, TX, USA) with a Biomek
NXP  (Beckman-Coulter,  Mississauga,  ON,  Canada)  automated  liquid-handling  instrument,  both
based on manufacturer’s instructions. The quantity of RNA was analysed using spectrophotometer
readings and normalised to 62.5 ng/ml with a Biomek NXP (Beckman-Coulter, Mississauga, ON, Can-
ada) automated liquid-handling instrument, based on manufacturer’s instructions. Mixed tissue RNA
(1 mg) was reverse transcribed into cDNA using the superscript VILO master mix kit (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA), following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Metatranscriptomic sequencing
We applied a panel of host biomarkers (genes) that when co-expressed are indicative of a viral dis-
ease state (VDD) (Miller et al., 2017). Samples that displayed a positive viral disease state, but were
not positive for viruses based on our 45 microbe panel screening, (as described in Bass et al.,
2019), were selected for high throughput sequencing of RNA (dual RNA-seq) to discover new viral
agents.
Total RNA from the mixed tissue samples was evaluated for quality using the Total RNA Pico chip
on the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) and quantified using the Qubit RNA Br kit
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). A 1/100 dilution of the ERCC RNA Spike-In control mix 1 (Ambion, Carls-
bad, CA) was added to each total RNA sample prior to ribosomal depletion and library preparation.
The sequencing libraries and ribosomal removal were performed using the Epicentre ScriptSeq
Complete Gold Kit (Epidemiology) (Illumina, San Diego, CA) according to manufacturer’s instruc-
tions and included a positive control (Universal Human Reference RNA) (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA)
and negative control (no total RNA). The rRNA depleted total RNA was purified using the Zymo
RNA Clean and Concentrate-5 kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA) according to manufacturer’s instruc-
tions and quantified using the Qubit RNA HS kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The ScriptSeq Index
reverse primers were added to the cDNA during the final amplification step which involved 14
cycles. The 3’-terminal tagged cDNA and final amplified library were purified using the Agencourt
AMPure XP system (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA). The final library size was determined using the HS
DNA chip on the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) and the concentration was
determined using the Qubit dsDNA HS kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Sample libraries were normal-
ised to 4 nM, pooled appropriately and denatured and diluted to obtain a final library of 17pM. Prior
to loading into a v3 2300 bp kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA), 2% phiX was spiked in. Finally, a
paired-end 251 bp sequencing run was performed on the Illumina MiSeq System (Illumina, San
Diego, CA), with four samples barcoded and pooled for each run.

indexed over one lane).
Sequence analysis
The quality of the raw reads was checked using FASTQC (v0.11.7) (https://www.bioinformatics.bab-
raham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/). Low quality reads or regions of adapter sequences were removed
using Trimmomatic (v0.36) (Bankevich et al., 2012). Reads were aligned to the Atlantic Salmon
genome using bwa mem (v0.7.17-r1188) and unmapped reads were retained. The unmapped reads
were then balanced using Trimmomatic and assembled into contigs using SPAdes (v3.9.1) genome
assembler (Bankevich et al., 2012). Putative viral contigs were identified by aligning translated con-
tigs using DIAMOND (v0.9.16.117) (Buchfink et al., 2015) to the nr database. Reference alignments
of all the reads to the viral contigs were used to ensure that no assembly artefacts occurred and the
contigs were trimmed appropriately using Geneious (V10.1.3). Assembled sequences are available
on Genbank (BioProject: PRJNA547678, Genbank accession numbers: MK611979 - MK611996) and
raw  sequencing  reads  have  been  uploaded  to  the  Sequence  Read  Archive  (SAMN11974798  -
SAMN11974801).
Phylogenetic analysis
The phylogeny of each virus was resolved based on the predicted replicase (CAV and SPAV) and
ORF1ab (PsNV) amino acid sequences, as nucleotide sequences were too dissimilar to reliably align.
Alignments were generated with MAFTT (v7.42) (Katoh and Standley, 2013) employing the E-INS-i
algorithm. This alignment algorithm is suited for evolutionarily distinct sequences with conserved
motifs (such as viral RNA polymerase) that are embedded within long unalignable residues. The
novel salmon viruses were aligned with other viral genomes with shared amino acid similarity as
detected by DIAMOND (Buchfink et al., 2015). In addition, viral genomes which are known to be
evolutionarily related to these were included. The multiple protein alignments were then used as to
build phylogenies using PhyML 3.0 (Guindon et al., 2010) plugin within Geneious with 100 boot-
straps to generate branch support values. Trees are mid-point rooted for clarity only, and do not
necessarily represent the ancestral relationship of the viruses.
Assay development and screening
Assembled viral sequence contigs from the appropriate sample were imported into Primer Express
v3.0.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) where qPCR Taqman assays were designed
using default parameters (Supplementary file 1). These assays were then tested using the Fluidigm
BioMark microfluidics-based qPCR system following the same protocol as described below except
with the new viral primer pairs included in the STA step and controls. From these initial screens, the
most consistent assay was chosen and APC standards were constructed to include in future Fluidigm
BioMark qPCR microbe panels. The assay-specific theoretical limit of detection was calculated as
previously described (Miller et al., 2016). The limit of detection was applied to categorise fish with
amplifications above the 95% detection threshold that is the concentration of the analyte in the sam-
ple   matrix   that   would   be   detected   with   high   statistical   certainty(95%   of   the
time). Epidemiological maps were generated using these data with the limit of detection applied.
The maps were created within R using ggplot2 (Wickham, 2016) and ggmap (Kahle and Wickham,
2013).
RT-PCR
For all samples, after reverse transcription, resultant cDNA was combined with the normalised DNA
in a ratio of 1:1 and used as the template for the specific target amplification (STA) step. The STA
involves a pre-amplification of all primers to be run on a single dynamic array at low concentrations
(0.2 mM of each of the primers), and upon completion, excess primers were removed by treating
with Exo-SAP-IT (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) according to manufacturer’s instructions and then
diluted 1:5 in DNA re- suspension buffer (Teknova, Hollister, CA).
The 96.96 gene expression dynamic array (Fluidigm Corporation, CA, US) was run according to
the procedure outlined previously (Miller et al., 2016). Specifically, a 5 ml template mixture was

Assay mix was prepared with 1each of the appropriate TaqMan qPCR assays (agent probe in
FAM-MGB and artificial positive construct (APC) probe in NED-MGB, 10 mM of primers and 3 mM of
probes) and 1Assay Loading Reagent (Fluidigm PN 85000736).
Controls were added prior to running the dynamic array (Miller et al., 2016). Note, APC clones
to all assays were contained in a single serially diluted pool, loaded last, minimising the likelihood of
contamination of any single APC clone. Once loading and mixing of the dynamic array was com-
pleted within the IFC HX controller, the array was transferred to the BioMark HD instrument and
processed using the GE 996 Standard TaqMan program for qPCR which includes a hot start fol-
lowed by 40 cycles at 95˚C for 15 s and 60˚C for 1 min (Fluidigm Corporation, CA, USA). The data
were analysed with Real-Time PCR Analysis Software (Fluidigm Corporation, CA, USA).
Chinook smolt samples positive for PsNV from 2014 were used for tissue localization (Figure 4A).
Gill, liver, heart, kidney, and brain were individually homogenized, processed for RNA extraction (as
described above), and 1 ug normalised RNA was used for reverse transcription. Resultant cDNA for
each individual tissue was used as the template for PsNV relative quantification using an ABI 7900HT
(ABI) in 384-well optical plates. The qPCR reaction volume was 12 ml, which comprised 6 ml of 2X
TaqMan Gene Expression Master Mix (ABI PN 4369016), 4.3 ml of water, 0.22 ml of mixed forward
and reverse primers (900 nM final concentration of each), 0.24 ml of each probe (200 nM final con-
centration; assay specific probe and APC control probe), and 1 ml of cDNA template. Temperature
cycles included one 2 min hold (50˚C), a 10 min denaturation (95˚C), and 40 cycles of denaturation
(95˚C for 15 s), annealing and extension (60˚C for 60 s). Amplification conditions on the ABI 7900
were not optimised for this platform, but rather closely reflected those used on the BioMark plat-
form. Samples run on the ABI did not undergo STA enrichment. Standard curves were constructed
using the same APC clone standards spiked in with CHSE DNA as on the BioMark. Serial dilutions
were made to obtain concentrations of 24, 1.2102, 6102, 3   103, 1.5   104, 1.5   105 copies
of the clone per reaction. Clone standards, unknown samples, positive and negative controls were
all run in duplicate. The ABI software calculates the relative copy number based upon the serial dilu-
tion of the standard curve.
Histopathology
Before the discovery of these viruses clinical signs of disease and histopathological lesions were
assessed for approximately 230 farmed Chinook salmon sampled in the Audit program. Conse-
quently, gills, skeletal muscle, spleen, liver, heart, anterior and posterior kidney, pyloric caeca and
brain from eleven samples of Chinook (eight wild fish and three farmed fish) and ten sockeye (all
wild fish) positive for SPAV were histopathologically analysed to assess the presence of lesions. All
tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, dehydrated through an ascending gradient of
alcohol solutions, embedded in paraffin wax, cut at 3.5 mm thickness, and stained with routine hema-
toxylin and eosin (H and E) for morphological evaluation by light microscope.
In Situ Hybridization (ISH)
RNA-ISH was performed using RNAscope 2.5 HD Duplex assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Newark,
California, USA, catalog# 322500) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, consecutive
sections of Chinook and sockeye salmon samples utilised for the histopathological analysis were
dewaxed by incubating for 60 min at 60˚C and endogenous peroxidases were quenched with hydro-
gen peroxide for 10 min at room temperature. Slides were then boiled for 30 min in RNAscope tar-
get retrieval reagents (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Newark, California, USA) and incubated for 30
min in RNAscope Protease Plus reagent prior to hybridization. The slides underwent hybridization
with RNAscope probes against a portion of SPAV-1 and SPAV-2 genome (Advanced Cell Diagnos-
tics, Newark, California, USA, catalog #513591-C2 and 538881-C2, respectively). A RNAscope probe
against Coil-p84 housekeeping gene in Chinook salmon (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Newark, Cali-
fornia, USA, catalog #512391) was used as positive control probe to confirm the efficacy of the
probes and the viability of the samples. Two samples which were negative for SPAV-1 and SPAV-2
were used as negative controls to confirm absence of background and (or) non-specific cross-

microscopy.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jeffrey Joy, Veronica Paglowski, Jan Finke, Thomas Waltzek, Ben Neuman and Humberto
Debat  for  advice  and  help  with  the  analysis,  DFO  Aquaculture  Management  Division,  Salmon
Enhancement Program and the Hakai Institute Juvenile Salmon Program for provision of samples,
and all of the vessel and field crews who collected the thousands of samples. We thank Amy Chan
and all members of the Suttle lab for their feedback as the project developed. This research was
supported by funding for the Strategic Salmon Health Initiative (SSHI), which is part of the Salish Sea
Marine Survival Project. The SSHI seeks to discover microbes present in salmon in British Columbia
that may be undermining the productivity of Pacific salmon, and is funded by the Pacific Salmon
Foundation (PSF), Genome British Columbia, and Fisheries and Oceans, Canada. This is publication
number 32 from the Salish Sea Marine Survival Project (marinesurvivalproject.com).
Additional information
                                                                                          
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Gideon J Mordecai, Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology,
Writing—original draft, Writing—review and editing, Led the analyses and prepared the figures;
Kristina  M  Miller,  Conceptualization,  Resources,  Supervision,  Funding  acquisition,  Investigation,
Project administration, Writing—review and editing, Conceived the study; Emiliano Di Cicco, Formal
analysis, Investigation, Writing—original draft, Conducted pathology, histopathology and in situ
hybridisation; Angela D Schulze, Investigation, Methodology, Performed sequencing, nucleic acid
extractions and molecular analyses; Karia H Kaukinen, Investigation, Methodology, Conducted field
sampling, nucleic acid extractions and molecular analyses including tissue localisation by RT-PCR;
Tobi J Ming, Investigation, Methodology, Conducted field sampling, nucleic acid extractions and
molecular analyses; Shaorong Li, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Conducted nucleic acid
extractions and molecular analyses; Amy Tabata, Data curation, Conducted field sampling, nucleic
acid extractions and molecular analyses; Amy Teffer, Investigation, Writing—review and editing,
Conducted  field sampling,  nucleic acid extractions  and molecular  analyses; David  A Patterson.

